Add explicit scenarios for feature gate usage (#387)
WebAssembly/component-model: design/mvp/WIT.md

Together, these gates support a development flow in which new features start
with an `@unstable` gate while the details are still being hashed out. Then,
once the feature is stable (and, in a WASI context, voted upon), the
`@unstable` gate is switched to a `@since` gate.

To enable a smooth transition (during which producer toolchains are targeting a
version earlier than the `@since`-specified `version`), the `@since` gate contains
an optional `feature` field that, when present, says to enable the feature when
*either* the target version is greater-or-equal *or* the feature name is explicitly

> enabled by the developer.

Reviewer: Would it make sense to delete this paragraph and also the `feature` field of `@since` from the grammar as well?

Author: Ah thanks for pointing this out, I should definitely add that in here -- just made the update!

  ///
  /// see: https://github.com/WebAssembly/WASI/blob/main/Contributing.md#filing-changes-to-existing-phase-3-proposals
  @unstable(feature = fgates-calc-minus)
  sub: func(x: i32, y: i32) -> result<i32, calc-error>;
}
```

At this point, consumers of the WIT can enable feature `fgates-calc-minus` through their relevant tooling and get access to the `sub` function.

Note that, at least until subtyping is relaxed in the Component Model, if we had to *add* a new case to `calc-error`, this would be a *breaking change* and require either a new major version or adding a second, distinct `variant` definition used by new functions.

**Second, when the feature is ready to be stabilized, switch to a `@since` annotation:**

```wit
package examples:fgates-calc@0.1.2;

@since(version = 0.1.0)
interface calc {
  @since(version = 0.1.0)
  variant calc-error {
    integer-overflow,
    integer-underflow,
    unexpected,
  }

  @since(version = 0.1.0)
  add: func(x: i32, y: i32) -> result<i32, calc-error>;

  @since(version = 0.1.2)
  sub: func(x: i32, y: i32) -> result<i32, calc-error>;
}
```

#### Scenario: Deprecation of an existing stable feature

> This section lays out the basic flow and expected usage of feature gate machinery when stabilizing a new feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section lays out the basic flow and expected usage of feature gate machinery when deprecating a new feature.
```

Author: Is this right? I wouldn't normally think of "deprecation" in the case of a new feature -- maybe I'll change this to "stabilizing new features and deprecating old ones".

Assume the following WIT package as the initial interface:

```wit
package examples:fgates-deprecation@0.1.1;

@since(version = 0.1.0)
interface calc {
  @since(version = 0.1.0)
  variant calc-error {
    integer-overflow,
    integer-underflow,
    unexpected,
  }

  @since(version = 0.1.0)
  add-one: func(x: i32) -> result<i32, calc-error>;

  @since(version = 0.1.1)
  add: func(x: i32, y: i32) -> result<i32, calc-error>;
}
```

**First: Add the `@deprecated` annotation to the relevant item in a new version**

```wit
package examples:fgates-deprecation@0.1.2;

@since(version = 0.1.0)
interface calc {
  @since(version = 0.1.0)
  variant calc-error {
    integer-overflow,
    integer-underflow,
    unexpected,
  }

  @deprecated(version = 0.1.2)
  add-one: func(x: i32) -> result<i32, calc-error>;

  @since(version = 0.1.1)
  add: func(x: i32, y: i32) -> result<i32, calc-error>;
}
```

At this point, tooling consuming this WIT will be able to appropriately alert users to the now-deprecated `add-one` function.

> **Second: completely remove the deprecated item in the next SemVer-compliant major version**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Second: completely remove the deprecated item in some future SemVer-compliant major version**
```

Reviewer: (Just because the "next" major version may be too soon, depending on timing/community.)

}
```

#### Scenario: Stabilization of a new feature

This section lays out the basic flow and expected usage of feature gate machinery when stabilizing a new feature.

Assume the following WIT package as the initial interface:

```wit
package examples:fgates@0.1.0;

variant calc-error {
  integer-overflow,
  integer-underflow,
  unexpected,
}

interface calc {
  add: func(x: i32, y: i32) -> result<i32, calc-error>;
}
```

**First, add new items under an `@unstable` annotation with a `feature` specified:**

```wit
package examples:fgates@0.1.1;

// ... elided ...

interface calc {
  add: func(x: i32, y: i32) -> result<i32, calc-error>;

>   @unstable(feature = minus)

Reviewer 2: For wasi, we established a convention to use the package as a prefix for features in order to avoid conflicts. This is not required by the spec, but it might be helpful to include a sentence that this is a good practice.

https://github.com/WebAssembly/WASI/blob/main/Contributing.md#filing-changes-to-existing-phase-3-proposals

Author: Ah thanks! will include this:

- [ ] Add package name as prefix to feature in example,

}
```

While you *may* include the `feature` portion of `@since` (i.e. `@since(version = 0.1.2, feature = minus)`), it is *ignored* by tooling and is only informational once the feature is stabilized.

#### Scenario: Deprecation of an existing stable feature

This section lays out the basic flow and expected usage of feature gate machinery when stabilizing a new feature.

Assume the following WIT package as the initial interface:

```wit
package examples:fgates-deprecation@0.1.1;

variant calc-error {
  integer-overflow,
  integer-underflow,
  unexpected,
}

interface calc {
  add-one: func(x: i32) -> result<i32, calc-error>;

  @since(version = 0.1.1)
  add: func(x: i32, y: i32) -> result<i32, calc-error>;
}
```

**First: Add the `@deprecated` annotation to the relevant item in a new version**

```wit
package examples:fgates-deprecation@0.1.2;

// ... elided ..

interface calc {
  @deprecated(version = 0.1.2)
  add-one: func(x: i32) -> result<i32, calc-error>;

  add: func(x: i32, y: i32) -> result<i32, calc-error>;
}
```

At this point, tooling consuming this WIT will be able to appropriately alert users to the now-deprecated `add-one` function.

> **Second: cmpletely remove the deprecated item in the next SemVer-compliant major version**

Reviewer 3: Minor typo "cmpletely"

Author: Ah thank you -- fixed!

}
```

#### Scenario: Stabilization of a new feature

This section lays out the basic flow and expected usage of feature gate machinery when stabilizing a new feature.

Assume the following WIT package as the initial interface:

```wit

> package examples:fgates@0.1.0;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
package examples:fgates-calc@0.1.0;
```

> variant calc-error {

Reviewer 4: Could this be moved within the `interface` below to be valid WIT syntax?

Author: Ah absolutely, thanks for this

- [ ] fix invalid `examples:fgates` WIT

  integer-overflow,
  integer-underflow,
  unexpected,
}

interface calc {
  add: func(x: i32, y: i32) -> result<i32, calc-error>;
}
```

**First, add new items under an `@unstable` annotation with a `feature` specified:**

```wit
package examples:fgates-calc@0.1.1;

// ... elided ...

interface calc {
  add: func(x: i32, y: i32) -> result<i32, calc-error>;

  /// By convention, feature flags should be prefixed with package name to reduce chance of collisions
  ///
  /// see: https://github.com/WebAssembly/WASI/blob/main/Contributing.md#filing-changes-to-existing-phase-3-proposals
  @unstable(feature = fgates-calc-minus)
  sub: func(x: i32, y: i32) -> result<i32, calc-error>;
}
```

> At this point, consumers of the WIT can enable feature `minus` through their relevant tooling and get access to the `sub` function.

Reviewer 4: s/minutes/fgates-calc-minus/

Author: Thanks good catch

`fix reference to minutes w/ `fgates-calc-minus`

> Note that if we had to *add* a new variant to `calc-error`, this would be a *breaking change* for most if not all downstream bindgen tooling (i.e. the enum would become a new object, incompatible with previous code).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that, at least until subtyping is relaxed in the Component Model, if we had to *add* a new case to `calc-error`, this would be a *breaking change* and require either a new major version or adding a second, distinct `variant` definition used by new functions.
```

**Second, when the feature is ready to be stabilized, switch to a `@since` annotation:**

```wit
package examples:fgates-calc@0.1.2;

// ... elided ...

interface calc {
  add: func(x: i32, y: i32) -> result<i32, calc-error>;

  @since(version = 0.1.2)
  sub: func(x: i32, y: i32) -> result<i32, calc-error>;
}
```

> While you *may* include the `feature` portion of `@since` (i.e. `@since(version = 0.1.2, feature = fgates-calc-minus)`), it is *ignored* by tooling and is only informational once the feature is stabilized.

Reviewer: To simply WIT authors' lives and save them from having to ask "should I keep the feature-gate name around... and for how long?", should we just remove the optional `feature` field?  If we can't identify a scenario where we recommend keeping it, then I would think yes.

Author: This I'd definitely be in favor of (I can't think of a real use case for the feature field) -- would this be worth making another issue as space to get feedback for the removal as a follow on to the work done so far?

I'm not quite sure what the original intent was for the optional feature to be added (historical context?), but a new issue might be a easier-to-reference future place for the "why"/intent

Reviewer: IIUC, this was the resolution of our previous discussion in #382 ([this comment](https://github.com/WebAssembly/component-model/issues/382#issuecomment-2251236972) was my attempt to summarize), so I think this has already been discussed and tentatively concluded.  Since this PR is intended to resolve #382 it could make sense here.

Author: Ah yes, thanks for reminding me -- I'll remove them here to match (and the code changes hopefully follow soon after for stuff like `wasm-tools`, etc)

Author: OK -- I've removed the mention of the `feature` portion of `@since` for now! I considered explicitly discouraging people from using it, but thought having the example just do the right thing should be fine.

#### Scenario: Deprecation of an existing stable feature

This section lays out the basic flow and expected usage of feature gate machinery when stabilizing a new feature.

Assume the following WIT package as the initial interface:

```wit
package examples:fgates-deprecation@0.1.1;

interface calc {
  variant calc-error {
    integer-overflow,
    integer-underflow,
    unexpected,
  }

>   add-one: func(x: i32) -> result<i32, calc-error>;

Reviewer: Maybe add a `@since(version = 0.1.0)` to `add-one` to make the example more representative of WASI?

Author: Hmnn, here I was hoping to convey that the `add-one` function was actually there at "inception" -- `fgates-deprecation@0.1.0`, and I'd imagine that most people wouldn't add `@since` gates for the very first version. 

I can add some more prose to make this clearer -- something like:

> For example, consider the following scenario (illustrated as WIT below):
>   - The interface `calc` was created with only one function (`add-one`), in package version `0.1.0`
>   - A more generic `add` was added in package version 0.1.1
>   - We'd like to deprecate `add-one` as the more generic version of `add` is more flexible

What do you think?

Reviewer: At least currently in WASI, we seem to be adding `@since` to everything, including functions present from inception.

Author: Thanks for pointing that out -- I'll make this consistent with the other WASI WITs!

Author: Just added this here: https://github.com/WebAssembly/component-model/pull/387/commits/ef754f097fd58d8adf06d8265bb0714c97a3d640
